Files for Submitted manuscript: "A model-based assessment of anthropogenic disturbance on lotic macroinvertebrate assemblages"

Abstract:
Traditionally, the effects of anthropogenic disturbance on biological assemblages are elucidated by comparing an assemblage observed at a site to one that represents a minimally disturbed state. Unfortunately, defining a minimally disturbed state is extremely challenging because of the extent of human disturbance. We use a national scale dataset and a two-stage model-based approach to assess how benthic macroinvertebrate assemblages at 1,748 sites would change if common anthropogenic disturbances were removed from in-stream physiochemical variables. First, we used random forest models and current landscape data to predict physiochemical conditions and then infer abiotic condition in the absence of disturbance. Second, we combined these estimates with joint species distribution models to predict the assemblage that would occur in these undisturbed conditions. Random forest models explained 48 – 75% of the variation in total nitrogen, phosphorous, sulfate, chloride, and substrate diameter. Generally, nutrient and salinity concentrations were higher, and substrates were finer than predicted to be without disturbances. Using this physiochemical data, joint species distribution models accurately explained genus richness (R2 = 0.73 – 0.85) and composition (Jaccard similarity index = 0.48 – 0.55). Depending on the ecoregion, we found that genus richness could change at 26 – 61% of sites if disturbance was removed. Different responses were observed for insect and non-insect taxa. For example, under anthropogenic disturbance, occurrence probabilities for Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera and Trichoptera tended to decrease at 5 – 26% of sites while occurrence probabilities for Mollusca and other non-insect, non-arthropod taxa increased at 5 – 33% and 11 – 24% of sites, respectively. Importantly, our framework provides an avenue for evaluating the effects of anthropogenic disturbance on macroinvertebrate assemblages without identifying reference sites. 
